We are recording, and we're speaking with Professor Helen Mendler in our office at Harvard.
I'm just going to move this over there.
And as you can see, I prepare a whole bunch of notes.
And I am interested, I guess we start with, is the poem relevant in the 21st century?
It will never not be relevant, because it's one of the evolutionary skills that we seem to, a certain number of us seem to be born with, just the way the composing of music
is everywhere and will never stop, so the composing of poetry has been everywhere.
But it's not something that most people can do, or can do well, any more than composing string quintets is something that most people can do or do well.
There will always be a minor group of people, or a minority of people, maybe what Ruskin called the saving remnant, who will be able to do this and also to enjoy it, because there are, just as there are different levels of talents in composition, so there are different levels of appreciation.
from children all the way up.
One of the things I'm hoping to talk about in this new book is the power, the enduring power of books to continue to change the world or to change people.
Poetry, obviously, has profoundly influenced and changed your life.
Do you feel that poetry continues to have this power to influence the way... I think poetry is one of many streams.
Every big change in the world, whether it's that we no longer hand-drawn corner people or whatever, we don't have public executions.
I mean, there have been big cultural changes, the vote for women, whatever.
All of these big changes that we undergo are not caused by any one thing, but the stream of ideas and feelings that are represented and expressed eventually changes the way people think about life and the way they respond to certain events in life.
So that you can't say that Beethoven did it, gave women the vote, or that George Herbert did it.
But the evolution of thought is contributed to by all forms of representation of human life.
So that whether it's photography or poetry, people see their own lives reflected back at them from any of these media of representation.
And eventually, somehow, cultures evolve.
Nobody quite knows how.
But then they make mistakes, like probably cutting off the king's head in England in 1649 out of fanaticism and religious enthusiasm.
And then they sort of learn that isn't such a good thing to do.
And so they don't cut off any more king's heads.
But there were 11,000 pamphlets written during the interregnum when Cromwell was on the throne, so to speak, when everybody had his or her say about the way government should or should not be run.
Who can say that mass of 11,000 pamphlets obviously was a huge outpouring.
Sure.
And they all had some effect, but we can't track those effects.
You can't track them.
There was an exhibition in London in 1963.
It was called Printing in the Mind of Man.
Are you familiar with that?
No, I am.
I'm starting this new book actually with kind of a, trying to recreate the ambience of that.
And it is regarded as, by some people, as perhaps the most significant book exhibition.
And what it was, was a collection of about 450 books that, in the humble opinion of those who curated the show, the 440 most important books, books that made things happen over the previous 500 years of printing, it was to commemorate the first 500 years of printing.
books that made things happen, books that, shockingly, from my point of view, and I raised this with a few British scholars, you know, only one, two pieces of Americana in there.
For instance, Uncle Tom's Cabin wasn't in there.
I mean, Lincoln meets Harriet Beecher Snow in the White House.
Apocryphal and I, he has said to have remarked, so this is the little woman, the little lady who
You know, but the thinking was, well, they didn't read American books, you know.
But they did have the Declaration of Independence in there.
Thomas Paine was in there.
They read him in England, but it was illegal.
Well, they assume that political things make things happen, and that scientific things make things happen.
I mean, there was Galileo, or there was Copernicus, or whatever.
And there's a clear line of influence that can be traced, either from the founding document
of democracy, I'd say, the Declaration of Independence.
But they don't find it easy to trace the effects of more ephemeral meditations.
I suppose that Yeats's poetry had some effect on the constitution of the Irish state, because he was the best-known writer, and expressed himself in letters to the editor, letters to friends, essays, poems.
I mean, he wrote over 12,000 letters alone, for instance, on top of the
poems and essays and letters to the editor.
So presumably people's feelings and thinking about the state of Ireland were influenced by Yeats, Paul, or Conn, but nobody can quantify that in any way.
Even if you can or cannot quantify it, you still can assess, perhaps, sense the impact.
I mean, there were six works of fiction in there, which is very interesting.
Cervantes was in there.
Of course, Pilgrim's Progress was in there.
Utopia was in there as a work of fiction.
And they had the, even though it wasn't, it didn't emerge in the age of print, there were printed editions, and they argued that it influenced, you know, any number of writers.
The Iliad and the Odyssey, of course.
Milton was in there.
Would you... Well, who could say what?
Who could say?
Yes, certain writers read Milton, either
intemperately like Blake, or appreciatively like Wordsworth, or perplexedly like Keats, who said life to him would be death to me.
So you feel a strong response of those other poets.
I just want to make sure those little numbers are working.
That's fine.
You do feel a strong response of those other poets to Milton.
Perfect.
That's fine.
But probably if Milton had a political effect, it was during the years he was being
essentially the Secretary of State for Cromwell, and running the foreign policy for the Commonwealth.
Other than poets, people had Milton lying around the house, but I think he was more honored than read.
And people have many such books lying around the house.
There's a Bible lying around the house, and how many people actually read it.
There are certain phrases you have to write down, even though on tape it's more honored than read.
Yes, well, I think that's the case of, as you know, a lot of the bestsellers.
People buy them and they never read them.
Well, your colleague here at Harvard, Dylan Gingrich, who produced a book called The Book That Nobody Read, and it's an ironic battle, but the suggestion was, Arthur Kessler, I guess it was, who said, this is probably the most
significant book that nobody has ever really read.
And so Owen says, well, is that really true?
And he goes out.
He tracks them all down.
And he tries to see the annotations that were in it.
You know, I find that very important.
That is interesting, yes.
That is interesting, isn't it?
But again, that is a work of novel scientific ideas.
So it's like the, you know, the double helix.
Everybody had to read the double helix.
who was in the field of biology, the field of physics, the field of chemistry, you couldn't not read it.
So there are indispensable books like that in science, because the field can't progress without taking that into account.
But I don't think you could say that the field of the novel couldn't have progressed if
Saul Bellow hadn't written Augie March.
Of course it would have progressed, because it progresses on many fronts.
It progresses as a literary form, as a artistic form.
I'm also interested in terms of making things happen.
You could argue almost that To Kill a Mockingbird, especially as translated into a film, transformed into a film.
It was a remarkably effective way of raising the consciousness.
people on civil rights.
I don't know if that's... But how would you know whether their consciousnesses were raised or not?
I mean, you could say so many people saw the movie.
If that doesn't prove that anybody's consciousness was raised, maybe people just enjoyed the movie.
You're looking for proof, aren't you, that something actually made... How about Rachel Carson's Silent Spring?
I mean, you can't quantify that, perhaps.
I think it was probably one of a stream of things, just the way Uncle Tom's Cabin had been preceded by a very active abolitionist movement.
with enormous intellectual force, magazines, newspapers, prominent Brahmins behind it, clusters and nodes of political maneuvering by the abolitionists, so that you might say the ground gets prepared, and then the book brings it into public view when it's been, you might say, a splinter group, so that
for instance, the acceptance of homosexuals was brought into public view by the Stonewall Riots, but there had been lots of incremental steps in which less and less were the sodomy laws applied.
England got rid of the, by the Wolferton Report of its sodomy laws.
And then you have the sort of public manifestation after the thing has accreted enough of a swell to spill over.
But often the public manifestations are not
You might say as important as the ground preparing was.
The abolitionist movement, I think, was probably more important than Uncle Tom's cabin, even though that elicited a public response.
But if you hadn't had an organized political movement with smart intellectuals behind it, you know.
Well, they were ready for it.
They were ready for it, yes.
And there's a lot of ground preparing that goes on.
And then something happens.
There's not going to be a great book to make, you know.
No.
If you walk into the Goddard Library at Clark University, past presidents and friends over there, they have a blow-up on the wall, this little pamphlet, and it was just a paperback, printed in 1922, I'm not sure about the year, but Robert S. Goddard with a title, On the Feasibility of Attaining High Altitudes.
Oh, the lots of business, yeah, yeah.
And this book was reviled, condemned, ridiculed by the New York Times and all organizations.
Really?
apologized in print in 1969 as Apollo was heading.
Of course, Gaudet was dead by that time.
But nobody read it.
It was ridiculed.
World War II ends.
Pretty well documented.
We capture our German scientists, Wernher von Braun, among them.
They said, where did you learn so much about this stuff?
And they said, well, you should ask your own Dr. Gaudet.
We read his books.
Not just that little book there, obviously, but his articles and all of his public domain patents and things like that.
But Goddard was the guy.
It didn't matter how many people.
No, in science, if it's true, it eventually gets reinvented if it has to be.
I mean, if Goddard had, if his book had languished on read, somebody else would have been discovering rocketry pretty soon.
And there are cases, and I can't think of any offhand, where research has been done but totally lost.
And somebody else comes to it in a totally independent way.
Sure, it's like Mendel, and then they pick up genetics and sort of discover him back there, having done his sweet beats or whatever.
But yes, that's why it's so hard to say what has happened in culture.
I don't know how many people have read Don Quixote as far as that goes, at least not all the way through.
Again, that's one of these books that people have on their bookshelves.
Especially the second pocket, you know?
Yeah.
You might read a lot of the first.
How many people read Beyond the Inferno when they get into time?
Exactly.
So to say these are important books, they are important because they've been canonized by subsequent writers who love Don Quixote, who love Montano, who love Dante, and read the whole thing and see the whole new possibilities being opened up for literature.
buy these books that invent a new way of writing, which is in effect what all those books do.
Nobody had written like Montaigne before Montaigne.
If you look back to the classical essay of Seneca or something, nothing sounds like Montaigne.
So when writers see that, then of course the stock goes up very high, but most people wouldn't be able to judge that.
Most people don't know enough about writing to say this is a new way of writing, even.
Do you think that the influence of a great writer sometimes
is measured by, I'm not praising this properly, but I guess perhaps you need a critic, perhaps you need a mediator to explain the significance of the writer.
Yes, sometimes you do.
I'm thinking of Elman and Joyce.
Sure.
I mean, I haven't read Joyce, I have to confess, but I've read Elman.
Yeah.
And I think I understand him through Elman.
Well, I do think brokering is necessary, otherwise we would all be out of business.
I know, seriously though, it helps to read
especially when you're young, something about a mysterious book that opens it up for you more.
And I think that, as Frank Ramone said in his essay, What is a Classic?, books that many generations can relish.
Maybe it's only many generations of writers who have relished Montaigne.
Maybe it's only many generations of fiction writers that have liked Don Quixote.
But then the prestige accrues to the books because they do not fade.
They are still delightful hundreds of years after they're written.
And most books are not delightful hundreds of years after they're written.
On the contrary, they're boring and dated.
When you think of interpretation and also in terms of, and I read in one of the interviews that you did, one of the first writers that you discovered was Baudelaire.
Mm-hmm.
Now, did you discover Baudelaire in French or in English?
No, actually, I knew French at the time, but my parents would not have had a volume of Baudelaire in the house in terms of the French books that were in the house.
Far from it.
And I think all they thought would have been on the bookshelf of my parents, but they did have Mark Van Doren's.
Anthology of World Poetry, and it was translated into English there.
And, of course, the flavor of Baudelaire's damnation sort of aura was there even in translation.
And it was in Chattanooga that I read.
I couldn't believe there was a poem.
Do you know that one about the carcass rotting by the side of the road?
And then he says, and even you will come to this, my beauty, you know?
Well, it was strong medicine, and I didn't know poetry could say things like that.
But I'm just wondering, is it essential to really appreciate a work, like I'm thinking of Blake, you know, who teaches himself Greek and Hebrew and Italian and whatever, and so he can experience the classics in their original language, and for purposes of not only for enjoying them, but to illustrate them.
Again, that kind of brings in the role of the mediator, doesn't it, of the poker, as you say?
There are many things I can only read in translation, and I'm very grateful to the translator.
On the other hand, I would, on the whole, I've occasionally done this, but on the whole, I wouldn't presume to set myself up as an authority on some author that I've only read in translation, because too much is missing.
And so that you could say certain things about the subject matter,
But you can't say much about the style if it's not a language you don't read.
How could I talk about the style of Mandelstam of Tsvitaeva?
That would be impossible.
But you could still appreciate the writer.
You could see some of the things they're doing in terms of content.
And if you don't mind if I bounce around on a few of these questions, by the way.
I have a number of things in here.
Follow them up when you think of them.
Pardon me.
Seamus Heaney says that he regards you as the, what's the exact quote, the finest close line reader.
Could you explain what he means by that?
The phrase that he used.
Well, I don't like the phrase close reading, though it has currency.
The best close reader of poems to be found?
Yes.
I would think that
to use the phrase close reading, which people don't understand, because they say, well, I can read too, and I can understand everything that James King said in this poem, or whatever.
But poems have, you know, about 15 levels.
And at first they have the simplest, the phonetic level.
And then you go up to the grammatical level, you go up to the syntactic level, you go up to the arrangement of images level, you go up to the propositional content, and
statements as severations, what have you.
You go to the emotional level where questions are different from exclamations, both are different from declarative sentences, both are different from vocatives, whatever.
And then you go to, from a poem, the context, as I see it, is the other poems in the same volume, and then the other poems written by that poet.
It's a series of concentric circles.
So there's this Seamus Heaney poem.
Around it are the other poems in that volume by Seamus Heaney, written within the same five or ten years.
Then you go out to the other volumes, and eventually you go out to influences on Heaney and so on, so that when you read a single poem, all of these things are reverberating, and you see how they mesh, how the phonetic is meshing with the grammatical, how the images are meshing with the syntax, how the
propositions that are being asserted are being undermined by certain tones of voice in the poem, perhaps, that you register that are in contrast to the separations.
And you feel that certain words have great weight, certain images have great weight, because you've read other poems by that poet, so that the words shimmer and resonate, and even the syntax shimmers and resonates, because you know it from other poems, so that you see more in a poem
because you're bringing so many levels of awareness to bear.
Whereas most people just bring a single level of awareness, what does this poem say?
And they treat it as so it were an essay with a topic sentence and things following.
Now you've said that you don't necessarily believe that knowledge of the biography of the poet is necessary to
Well, if it were, it would be too bad, because we don't know anything about Shakespeare.
That's right.
And that's an excellent answer.
You said that in the same interview.
However, having said that and agreeing with it, and in particular where you, as a scholar, have researched the lives of Keats and Wallace Stevens and Yeats, does it matter to you to know, for instance, what they read, the books that mattered in their lives?
It depends.
It certainly... Does it give you some insight into their...
Well, when you see, I'm first looking into Chapman's Homer, and you can see that Keats has been reading the Odyssey, it would be a mistake not to take that into account.
And when he writes a poem called I'm Sitting Down to Read King Lear Once Again, you have to take that into account so that there's a lot that's explicit that they answer back.
They often respond to their own poems.
I mean, Milton writes to Ben Zoroso.
as a response to his own L'Alegro.
It would be too bad to read Il Panceroso and not to have read L'Alegro.
So I think, for me at least, usually I, sometimes I've encountered an author through a biography, but mostly I encountered them in my youth through anthologies.
And they didn't have, in anthologies in those days, they had no biographical information to speak of.
And so there were all these poems
that had no life history attached to them.
Then, if I liked the poems, I would go and get, I would find out about the life history, I would go find pictures, whatever, but that was all subsequent to the attachment to the words, yeah.
Now, I know that for many people, a biography comes first, and the life interests them, and as somebody, say, a fellow Jesuit might read A Life of Hopkins and think, I never knew the order had a poet before,
and go out and read Hopkins as the work of a fellow Jesuit, or people might read political things for that reason, or Protestants read Milton for that reason.
They thought that he was equivalent of the Bible, so to speak, and he was there.
And another interview you mentioned, I guess reading the reviews of Eliot, for instance, you said it doesn't matter at all what he's writing about the poem, because it's
It appears to be something that he would like to do.
Further himself, in himself, yes.
They're all manifestos disguised or not, but poets write prose because they have such a strong orientation towards the world and a strong orientation towards expression that their expression must carry their sense of literary preference or
literary urgency, what is important that should be written now, or what is wrong about what is being written about a particular topic.
You mentioned elsewhere also that Yeats was your first real book about a poet, I guess.
Yes.
And it's interesting also that Yeats wasn't in your household.
No, no.
This is kind of an independent discovery of yours.
Well, actually, I kept wondering
why I had not written a book on Hopkins, who was the first poet that I memorized with great intensity.
And... Don't mind me, I'll just... I set up straight at least.
I said wonderful pictures, and my wife is the editor, so... All right.
We don't let anything go through.
It's not nice.
Don't mind me.
You can talk while I'm shooting.
But I, um...
I realized I'd never written a book on Hopkins, because I wrote my senior thesis in high school on Hopkins, and I had just memorized all of Hopkins.
We had a senior thesis to write.
It was supposed to be 16 pages or something, and I wrote 42 pages on Hopkins.
So I had had my say on Hopkins.
I didn't need to have.
I had worked that all out in my head and had my say, even in a very amateurish way.
But that impulse to communicate what you thought had already been exhausted in me with respect to Hopkins, even if on a very amateur, childish level.
So I later wrote an article on Hopkins, two articles on Hopkins, but the push to write a book wasn't there.
When we had our first conversation a few years ago, you said then that one of the reasons you had never written about Shakespeare before, and the only reason that you were writing about the sonnets and not the plays, is you
paraphrasing, but you didn't feel worthy to invoke Shakespeare.
Well, no, you'd have to know a lot before you read.
I mean, who could possibly know more than, I don't think, obviously you must know as much about Shakespeare as 99% of the people out there.
Yes, but one has one's own criteria of when it is appropriate to be able to say something without doing an injustice to the author.
A lot of people swoop down on a single poem, especially by politically active poets like Gates or Ginsburg, and they swoop down on one poem that suits their purpose, and they quote it in some article, and they get it all wrong because it's the only thing they've read by Ginsburg or Rich or Yates, but so that you feel the thinness that's behind the utterance of someone who doesn't know the thing through and through.
So until you...
have worked hard enough on it, you don't feel you have any right to say anything.
It's just like foreign policy or something.
People can spout all they want about what we should be doing in Iran without knowing anything about, I mean, in Iraq, sorry, without knowing anything about Iraq or knowing the language or the culture.
Probably Iran, too.
Yes, but I can imagine a specialist in foreign affairs looking at these letters to the editor in op-ed thinking, they have no right to say anything about what's going on.
They don't know enough.
And that's the way I often feel about myself.
I mean, I don't know enough yet.
Well, and to jump back to the influence of poetry.
In the world?
In the world.
You had mentioned elsewhere that in Japan, children are required to memorize
I guess the top 100... Yeah, I was told that that may have been 15 or 20 years ago.
I don't know if it's still going on in Japan.
Well, I'm going to check up on it.
Check it up, yeah.
It is pretty interesting that they take this approach to... because it does relate with what you say elsewhere about...
and your Jefferson speech, I think, creating a sense of patrimony.
And how else do you preserve it and pass it on?
Exactly.
I mean, it's not that hard.
Children can be taught to memorize anything.
So it's just a question of the value the culture puts on something.
And we have had such spectacular successes, as I said, too, in that lecture in science and in technology, that they glitter in front of us
And it's hard to see anything but that as our patrimony, along with, quote-unquote, democracy.
We all know the compromised form of democracy we have.
But when you say to people, what's special about the United States, they will say democracy, and then they will say something like,
science, technology, all of that, all the way up to the atom bomb and genetics and everything else.
But I don't think they say anything else about America.
Nobody says, we have such wonderful music.
Nobody says, our great painters.
Nobody says, our great poet.
And our painters are wonderful.
Of course.
And there's no sense that that's the culture that they're living in.
So I do think, I mean, it is blinding the achievements of science and technology at the moment.
And it is identified with America, simply because we are so rich, and we had almost, as you said, flowering scientists.
There's a new book just out by a colleague of yours here at Carver.
Her name escapes me at the moment, but she's a neurologist.
The Midnight Disease, you know the book I'm talking about?
Writer's block, I guess.
Oh, I read something about it in the Gazette, yes.
So I'm looking at it, reading it.
It's pretty interesting.
But she does mention how she reads obsessively, and as a scientist, she said, maybe this is my pay-in to the
to the printed book, because none of her colleagues in the sciences do use books anymore.
No.
They're online.
The journals are online.
Is it possible for books?
You went forward to talk about the double helix or whatever that has to be dealt with by scientists, I guess.
Do you think that will continue to be the case?
I think that was essentially a popularization.
All the biologists already knew about the double helix by the time
Watson wrote it.
And he and Crick and Franklin had done the work long before.
So I'm sure it had been in all the scientific journals for some time before he actually wrote the book that popularized it.
But I do think that the popularizing of science, which is a wonderful enterprise and necessary, and is often extremely well done, needs to keep going.
And in that sense,
I'm not sure how you would get people to feel that something was popular that was online.
Maybe they would.
Our notion of popular is the bestseller list or big reviews in important places, and then you might buy the book or get it from the library.
But if it's online, maybe with this younger generation, their notion would be to go, they read a review of it and read it online, if it were online.
Now things aren't put online right away, so that they can have a sale, a hard cover sale.
I argue in my last book, Patients and Fortitude, which are the names of the lions, by the way.
Yes, yes.
Sometimes think it's a lost Jane Austen novel.
Patients and Fortitude.
Well, actually, one person wrote and said, I don't have a copy of your Pride and Prejudice.
I don't know if they'd swear.
Oh, isn't that funny?
But those are the lions.
Yes.
Nice image, I thought.
Where was that called?
Do you know the call about that by Walter Stevens?
No.
The vegetation still bounds in forms.
Oh, no, don't tell me I missed exactly something I could have used there.
Oh, yeah, well, I'll look for it in a minute, but anyway.
It's a good poem.
Do you use patient support?
Do you refer to the lion?
Yes, he talks about the things that people put outside of banks and libraries and things like that.
Yeah, I'm just trying to remember the... Do you want me to find it?
I have them looking everywhere to find that.
Really?
Why is it that people put lions in front of the libraries?
I mean, I don't have... Well, the lion probably does stand for fortitude.
I mean, the four cardinal virtues, as you know, are prudence, justice, fortitude, and temperance.
And it's justice, fortitude, and temperance.
Those are the four cardinal virtues.
And I think prudence was thought of more as a...
It was something that bankers did.
But fortitude was thought of as very useful for the Christian soul and so forth.
And justice was thought of as very important for the welfare of society.
So justice and fortitude are the ones that tend to get foregrounded as public signs rather than... But of course, the names came by chance at the New York Public Library.
He was a male LaGuardia.
He used to get his Sunday night addresses.
And he named the line?
Well, he used to... He would barely end his Sunday night
by saying what we need to see us through the great ordeal that lay ahead, to exercise the twin virtues of patience and fortitude.
Patience and fortitude.
Prior to that, the lions were Aster and Lennox.
They didn't have any, you know, patrons.
But I'm thinking more in terms of the actual use of the lion, the lion as a metaphor, as more than a metaphor, as a guardian.
You know, the British Library, the British Museum has lions, the Chicago Art Institute has lions, the Morgan Library has
What is it about the lion as a guardian of knowledge, I wonder?
Well, I think you think you're a little, yes, probably, yeah.
I think probably that's one of it anyway, one of them anyway.
Only I can remember the title.
I don't find it.
It's Wallace Stevens as good, doesn't it?
It certainly is Wallace Stevens.
I don't think it's too late to get it in the paperback.
That's the kind of thing I'll put up on my website.
Yes.
Courtesy of Ellen Velland, do you mind?
No.
If you have to get a snob, I think it was okay, not me.
I love your line, critics and scholars are evangelists.
Yeah, I do.
You really do kind of need your champion, don't you, if you're a writer?
Well, a poet who will remain nameless said to somebody who told me, I don't have a critic.
And he sort of meant as his patron or as his sponsor in the public mind.
And I think that's too bad.
Here we are.
Lions in Sweden.
Oh, wow.
You will love this.
Lions in Sweden?
What page is it on there?
124 in the collected poems.
And he's saying that these are sovereign images, and they meant a lot to people in the past.
these images of the cardinal virtues.
But now that's all faded and gone, and they're not relevant to us anymore, or they don't resonate in the way they used to.
And he thinks of these animals that represent an alliance and so forth as belonging to a kind of zoo of allegorical images from Christianity, Judeo-Christian tradition, and so forth.
And he thinks, well, we need a new zoo.
And he thinks that
about the Hamburg group that Ducy apparently did some drawings of or something.
That's why he mentions Hamburg at the end.
And it ends the sovereign images.
I'm not going to put them in my poems.
They're no use to me anymore.
But we still hanker after the sovereign images.
And then he ends up, we're going to get, we can send back the old ones.
We're going to get the new ones.
Could you read it for me?
Sure.
No.
It would feel wonderful.
I could use it.
Lions in Sweden.
No more phrases, Swenson.
I was once a hunter of those sovereigns of the soul and savings banks, fides, the sculptor's prize, all eyes and thighs, and galled justitia, trained to poise the tables of the law, patientia, forever soothing wounds, and mighty fortitudo, frantic face.
But these shall not adorn my souvenirs, these lions, these majestic images,
If the fault is with the soul, the sovereigns of the soul must likewise be at fault, and first.
If the fault is with the souvenirs, yet these are the soul itself.
And the whole of the soul, Swensen, as every man in Sweden will concede, still hankers after lions, or, to shift, still hankers after sovereign images.
If the fault is with the lions, send them back to Monsieur Dufys Hamburg whence they came,
the vegetation still abounds with forms.
Want me to hear it?
Do you mind?
No.
Isn't that perfect?
And you know, I already see how I'm starting the scene.
Come in again.
That was wonderful.
Thank you.
You're welcome.
We're doing very well here.
So I guess, I don't mean there to
But what a person you're interested in, as a writer who has read, is of marginal interest to you?
It depends.
There are writers that you cannot read unless you know the Bible.
For instance, so many of the African American 19th century poems come straight out of, especially Exodus, because that was a popular text.
You can't read Dante without knowing the Bible and St.
Thomas Aquinas.
at least, at the very least, on St.
Augustine probably too, so that there are indispensable books for certain writers.
But you don't get that much, for instance, out of reading the prototype for Romeo and Juliet.
It's a nice little Italian story, and he did change it.
So if you want to know what he added, you want to read it.
But it doesn't, it's not essential to your enjoyment of Romeo and Juliet that you should have read the story he cooked it from.
For instance, as a person interested in this sort of thing, I think it makes sense, for instance, for me to go to Cambridge University and see Isaac Newton's library, you know, or Leonie Dell has kind of put together Henry James's reading.
Reading, yes.
And that is so much to him.
They've done Emily Dickinson's reading, too, and they've done, um, I mean... Have they done it at Dickinson's?
Yeah.
How do they put that together?
Library or whatever?
Again, references in her letters, references...
magazines that they know she took.
She wrote at least one poem in response to an article by Thomas Wentworth Higginson and The Dial.
They've put it together, and they've put together... Stephen's Library is out in the Huntington.
Many people have this checklist of his books that his wife didn't destroy.
I mean, she gave some of them away, and she destroyed some of them.
But what's left is a checklist.
Did he annotate to Glory Heavenly?
Not much, no.
And he just was put inside the back file, page 32, page 44.
And he didn't like to deface books, clearly.
And so I think it is interesting for people who have a kind of philosophical interest in the mind of the poet.
What they're interested in is the consciousness of the writer rather than the independent works.
And when they write on the consciousness of a writer, they will often use a line from this poem and a line from that poem, and then a paragraph from a letter, and then some comment by a critic.
So you'll never see the beautiful thing itself whole.
And my interest is always in the beautiful thing itself whole.
So I can't bear to quote only a stanza of something.
I want people to see the whole thing.
When you think of Coleridge and his stuff down at Yale, I mean, the annotations,
Oh, yes, the marginalia are incredible.
And they're good enough to be published, as you know.
And they are being published.
Yes, they're being published, yes.
Is it Princeton?
There's a whole line of them, yes.
I'm quite eager to get on, and I will at some point to get on, not to be a scholar in these, but a lot of people are doing that.
Do you know Seamus Heaney's poem called The First Gloss?
No.
They were lovely gulf bosses, of course, in the medieval manuscripts.
There's a lovely little poem in which the monk writes about his cat.
You know that one?
I have to show you that, too.
That's been translated.
But in the Hindi, it's in a section called Sweeney Redivivus.
And it's about being a rebel.
And instead of being...
a nice copier in the scriptorium.
It's called The First Gloss.
It's called The First Gloss, and it's in a sequence called Sweeney Redivirus, which, if I'm correct,
Here it is.
Yes.
It's in the volume called Station Island, and I'll be right back.
Well, there's another wonderful poem in the sequence called The Scribes.
Are you interested in... I'm shameless.
In a savage little poem?
Yes, I am, yeah.
Well, Heaney was vilified by a lot of his fellow writers in the North for moving to the South.
in 1971 or two.
And he was much the most famous of them, and so attracted, and how kind and nice he is, beautiful source of envy.
And so he represents himself as a monk in the scripturalium talking about his fellow scribes.
Here it is, the scribes.
The wonderful poems.
These poems really are alive for you, aren't they?
They are indistinguishable from life.
They are really, it was a wonderful title of a book, Books Are Not Life But Then What Is.
It was a collection of minor journalistic criticism, and I love the title of the book, Books Are Not Life But Then What Is.
Well, I think that I, as you probably have seen, I said in another one of those interviews or one of them,
My mother used poems in this way.
I haven't.
And just followed them in the middle of the class, and I didn't know until later.
I didn't know it.
No, I mean, they were, for her, part of her language.
And so, for me, too, they're part of my language.
So it's more than, some might argue that poetry is innate, but it seems also that the influence from your parents, your father knowing multiple languages, and your mother constantly quoting poetry,
Yes, it was partly, but my sister had exactly the same training, you might say.
She was two years older than I. And it didn't take.
So, I mean, I think it has to be, it's like musical training, too.
You know, my every daughter writes poetry.
See, I don't know where she got that from.
She had a friend.
She's graduated from college.
She sends her a poem for her birthday.
And my wife said, you take a look at Nicole's poem.
And I said, Nicole, this is very good.
Where is it coming?
Well, they've always read books in the house.
Well, naturally, yes.
But did it take more with one than with another?
My older daughter, Barbara, went to Smith, and she worked in the library.
My younger daughter went to Sweet Brush.
She worked in the library.
That's right.
She worked there.
And Barbara is now French literature.
She's getting her master's over there.
So they got literary attention.
Nicole's applying to library school as well.
Not that she wants to be a librarian.
She wants to work in film and film preservation, and why not?
But also, if somebody in the house is doing it, it doesn't seem mysterious or undoable, because my parents would teach us to seem natural to be a teacher.
It wasn't frightening.
It wasn't intimidating.
This, incidentally, is from the same sequence, and they're talking about influence.
I thought this was written about Yeats, the masters they've written.
He said it was about Milosz.
So this is a concrete illustration of somebody.
having an influence on some other poets.
And I'm not asking you a lot of biographical things, because I have that.
Yeah, I have that, yes, yeah.
And I'm a very long time going over things.
And I thought that interview, which is just put up in Humanities, the major, have you seen that yet?
Yeah, yeah.
Cole?
Yeah, the... I got it off the internet.
You know, they're supposed to send me more of these, but they haven't yet.
Have you seen?
This is the whole kit and cajolo.
Oh, I'll get one of these, yeah.
The lecture isn't there, but the interview with two Coles.
Oh, you have the interview with Bruce Cole and with Ali Cole, both in there.
Oh, I don't have this Bruce Cole.
You know, it's also the interview with Ali Cole and many pictures of my family once in another.
I love you, yeah.
There we are.
That's me.
Wow.
Proud parent.
So two girls and a boy?
Boy, yes.
I was in the middle.
That's great.
The old family pictures are really, really fun.
Yeah, no, I've noticed.
I'll have to do a search.
The booth call thing ends up.
You'd think the unreadful thing would be on my screen.
Well, you'd think so, but they, you know, they have a word in their mouth.
Stuff they won't digitize, so.
I'm sorry, so let me just think of...
I hope I'm not taking up too much time here.
No, no, absolutely no place I have to be.
I'm fine.
Talk about canons here.
I want to talk to Dan Aaron, for instance, and the Library of America.
I mean, this whole idea of the canonization of American literature, deciding what is canonical.
And is this something that you think critics do, or is it something that happens over?
No, it's something that other writers do.
If a writer doesn't interest other writers,
He can have published 37 volumes, and they will all just moulder in the library, and nobody will ever want to read them again.
Other writers?
Other writers.
They're the ones that found and continue the canon.
Well, that's very important from my standpoint, isn't it?
Yes, yes, I think so.
Because you have to be doing something that other writers admire, and they, the best poems of every century are kind of pulled out of the air.
They were hanging there in the air, only they were invisible to everybody except the person who pulled them down.
And so that it seems almost inevitable that somebody would have written, let's say, Paradise Lost or the Divine Comedy.
It was all just waiting there.
Hell, purgatory, heaven, all the doctrines, all the scholasticism, Virgil as the poet who was the psychopomp that can take you down to hell and everything.
It was all just there.
And so was the vernacular when everybody else was writing in Latin.
But it took...
It takes some kind of courage to reach up into the air and pluck down one of those clouds and make it real.
And other writers don't admire that very much.
There are little canon makers, a good review, you know, a good review that praises the book, or a teacher who puts the book on the syllabus.
But again, that won't last if writers don't admire the person.
That has to be writers.
It has to be writers.
Isn't that, I've not heard that.
Well, it's like composers.
It's composers who admire other composers.
artists who admire other artists.
So when things are rediscovered, like Melville is forgotten in his lifetime, I mean, he's ridiculed.
Melville Dick is reviled.
It's a disaster here.
Right.
How does that all of a sudden become the great American novel?
How does Emily Dickinson fail to get published in her lifetime and is an ally of her?
Well, she refused to be published in her lifetime.
Well, Higgins had had something to do with that, too, didn't he?
Well, yes.
I mean, he, but her friend Helen Hunt Jackson kept wanting to publish her and wanting to pick a volume that wrote Ramona.
And Dickinson just stiff-armed her, all the attempts.
And so that, you know the poem that begins, publication is the auction of the mind of man.
How public like a frog, et cetera.
What happens is that Melville is very much admired, e.g.
by Hoffman, a fellow writer.
He's also admired by the other writers in New York that he knows and the editors and so on.
Then he has that trough that happens to most poets and writers after they die.
They somehow go under for a while.
Just the way Eliot doesn't have anywhere near the prestige now that he had back in the 40s and 50s.
There is that trough.
And then there's a sifting.
And the professionalization of literary study means that if somebody says, I am in 19th century novel, that he will go out and read a lot of novels that are relatively forgotten or whatever.
Then if he sees that something seems to him unduly neglected, he will then go and edit Billy Budd or something, as indeed was done from the manuscript that was lying around at Houghton or wherever.
And then there's another push forward, and it could be happening from a scholar.
But I think
The scholar was excited for the same reason that Hawthorne was.
There's something there that anybody interested in writing was great.
Because he was a dedicated movie text.
Yes.
Yeah, but still, I mean, clearly.
They knew each other, and he scared Hawthorne to death, and so on.
Do you know the poem he wrote about Hawthorne?
Hawthorne he calls fine in his long poem, Clairol.
It wasn't published long after his death, and longer than paradise lost twice as long.
that Melville wrote about the Holy Land and whatnot, and there are many characters.
They all take different religious positions through Claral, and one of them is called Vine, and it's clearly half-born.
I mean, the name, so obviously.
And then... A beautiful poem, Melville, called Monody.
To have known him, to have loved him, after loneliness long.
And then to be estranged, he says, and neither to be in the wrong.
And it's baffling to him that they are estranged.
And he then talks about the grave of Botha, a very beautiful poem.
And the estrangement clearly wounded Melville so much.
So when you get something like the Library of America and this attempt at publishing a canon, what do you suppose, is it editors and critics, or are they listening to
In the early stages, when they were restoring to print works, it had fallen totally out of print.
That's true.
But often they were very well-known authors, so that Edgar Allan Poe has a role in the history of American literature, but his literary criticism had not been anthologized the way the poems had been.
So they restore a piece of Poe, but they don't invent Poe.
And some of the works are there not for
literary reasons so much as for political ones, like the Jefferson volume.
I mean, yes, Jefferson is a good writer, but nobody thinks of him as one of the stars of, you know, American fiction or poetry or whatever.
Except the Declaration of Independence is in the printing of the mind of that.
But that's more for impact, of course, than... Sure, and also, Lincoln should be there for all the same reasons.
But then, it's interesting, since the canonical works tend to be the best works,
A lot of people might have read Moby Dick without reading Billy Budd, or certainly without reading Clarol.
God knows anybody but me, I think, has read Clarol.
And Melville's gone.
I haven't read Clarol.
It's wonderful.
Clarol, I haven't read it all.
Clarol, yes.
Well, it's worth a look.
Wonderful descriptions of the Dead Sea and the desert and the Holy Land.
They sent him off to the Holy Land because they thought he was crazy.
Having a nervous breakdown probably was.
But what they do then is surround
You might say the canonical work, the work that has gained him a place in the pantheon of American literature as a serious and much admired writer.
Then they put everything else around it, the letters and the prose.
And so people who really want to binge on the writer can have the whole thing there.
So it's a little different from saying this is the canon of American literature.
What it is is canonical works.
and canonical authors surrounded by the penumbra of their lesser works.
And one thing they are doing recently
Anthologizing.
Yes, that nice two-volume 19th-century one that Howard did.
They've done a few things on baseball, writing about Americans in Paris.
Yeah, it's not enough to make a whole thing.
It's not enough to make a whole, but they just say, well, there's some work, too.
I like that, too.
I do, too.
They have three little poetry volumes, by the way.
Yes, I'm supposed to do one of them, but I haven't decided which one.
But those are very handy to put on your pocket.
I just love that program.
I have every one of those books.
Do you?
At the very beginning.
He wrote articles about it, and I've just been a great fan.
You know, and of course they miss on some, and they maybe exaggerate on others.
But still, it's wonderful that you can endow it.
Oh, no, it's like a fayad.
I mean, it's a very good thing to have around the model, yes.
Do you think it's necessary for someone like Shakespeare, you know, talking about canonical writers,
to have a new edition of their work, say, for each generation?
Does every generation demand a new Shakespeare?
Well, Shakespeare, as you know, is a mess, in that there are all those quartos out there, as well as the first folio and so on.
And even the first folio needed editing in the long run.
So that when you have a mess, there'll be somebody every generation who thinks he or she has the gift to straighten out the mess for good.
And John Berryman spent a long time trying to figure out the editorial
correctness for King Lear, because there's so much that doesn't overlap in the folio and the quarto, and the text is so difficult.
And now people have decided there are two King Lears, as you know, probably in the last whatever it is, Oxford or something.
So I think where there's a mess, there will always be editors.
That's another form of people.
I don't know what they did in prehistoric times.
I mean, when the poets were chanting and the artists were drawing on the caves, the editors must have been doing something, but I don't know what.
But they are very great people sometimes.
I mean, the great editors are great people, I think, and we need them.
And the great collected editions, the great Wordsworth edition, the great Yeats edition, now the manuscripts, they're dispensable.
So in those cases where the author has the final say, it's fine.
There probably doesn't need multiple editions of the... Not if it's modern and there's a good
approved text within the author's lifetime.
There's probably a couple of typos that need these extra notes.
Sure.
That sounds like Keats, for instance.
But when you get back that far, even as far as Keats, poems came out in two different versions, a journal version and then a book version, so that La Belle, there are two complete versions of La Belle d'Amazon Messie, which differ a great deal from journal to book.
And then there are ones he left to his death, and it's not as big a mess as, say, Dickinson.
which is another huge, nice mess for people to work with.
That almost demands to be read in facsimile, wouldn't you think, if we can leave it that way?
Well, you can.
That was for a form of publication, I think Franklin has argued.
But even reading in facsimile, since sometimes she leaves the space and she puts as many as fourteen different possibilities for the space at the bottom of the page, there's no way to arrive at the final poem, because she doesn't say which one she would have chosen.
So you have 14 versions of the poem there, depending on which noun you slot into that space.
So that's where the editor really would have intervened, don't you think?
Well, yes.
Had it been published, she would have had to choose.
But she left a lot of those thoughts at the bottom of the page.
She'd make little asterisks and put several possibilities.
So does that help you as a reader, or does that confuse you?
Well, it helps you to understand her mind.
Because as you put in, this poem I'm thinking about is the one called The Bible is an Antique Volume.
written by fated men at the suggestion of holy specters.
You can see why they love her today.
That's wonderful.
And so when she comes to the end, she wants to say that if they'd stop all this hellfire and damnation stuff in the pulpit, people would want to be religious, but they're scaring them away.
And so she's thinking about Orpheus, and she says, had got the tale a blank, blank teller, all the boys would come.
Orpheus' sermon, fascinated.
It did not condemn.
So have at the tail a, and she says, friendly teller?
Have at the tail a tropic, a tropic teller?
Have at the tail a typic teller?
Have at the tail, I think the one she would have had was a warbling teller.
That would say if it was beautiful.
So with each one, she's thinking typic.
If they told those wonderful stories about types and anti-types, then people would come.
Tropic.
One with metaphorical imagination, people would come, friendly.
On a human level, people would come.
And she gives you all these options?
Yes.
I think of, like, if you go over to Shakespeare's song, it was at 146, where they really messed up.
And so there's that one word there.
I love just reading the various suggestions.
Yes, many.
Slave, flaw.
What is it?
Who knows?
I know.
You do?
In my Shakespeare book, which I think you said you had.
I have, and it's a few years, yes.
Well, I think that I know what he did, what he wanted to do, but I may not give him my reasons, but anyway, and I think I'm right, but that's really the end or the end.
I have the book.
Well, you can look it up.
I will.
It's Shakespeare, it's 146.
146, yeah.
Do you want the Dickinson?
With all the words down the bottom?
I have an edition of Dickinson.
Okay.
Do you have a Johnson edition?
The three-volume Johnson?
I do, yes, yes.
Okay.
If the Bible is an antique volume.
Is this the one that Harvard published?
Yes.
Yeah.
I have that.
In the three-volume one, you'll see all the friendly, tippic, trophic, warbling all listed down at the bottom.
I have it.
Good.
That's wonderful.
So I've got your book on the sonnets, but just help me here.
How did you arrive at knowing what that word, what Shakespeare is?
Well, in many of the sonnets, Shakespeare uses the same root in all four of the parts, quatrain one, quatrain two, quatrain three, a couple of, but that's four parts.
And he'll use, say, like fed, seeding, seed.
But the same word will appear the four times.
Nobody had noticed this until I did my book.
And it's really fascinating because it ties together the four pieces.
And that's because people don't look at the words.
They only look at the sentiments.
So they never notice the same words.
And so I call those keywords because they seem to me to be deliberately there.
It doesn't occur in each part separately unless somebody's putting it there.
Then there are certain interesting ones where you see it.
In part one, you see it in part two.
You see it in a couplet.
And you expect it in part three, and it's not there.
But then I was trying to figure out why.
Usually it's the negative of the rest.
So when he's not talking about it, he won't put it in the other three.
So it's a sonnet that has two points of view of them.
And these words are, of course, crucial, because they appear in each one of the four parts.
And sometimes he does very funny things when he can't
Not Marble, not a Gilded Mother.